---
title: "Reinforcement learning in building controls: A comparative study of algorithms considering model availability and policy representation"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2009-10-01-paper-title-number-1
date: 2024/05
venue: 'Journal of Building Engineering'
paperurl: 'https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2352710224010659'
citation: '<strong>Wu, Z.</strong>, Zhang, W., Tang, R., Wang, H. & Korolija, I. Reinforcement learning in building controls: A comparative study of algorithms considering model availability and policy representation. J. Build. Eng. 109497 (2024).'
---

**Highlights**<br>
- Model-free and model-based reinforcement learning algorithms were implemented.
- Reinforcement learning of value-based, policy gradient and actor-critic are discussed.
- Training efficiency and control performance of algorithms were investigated.
- Data demand and robustness to hyperparameter tuning of algorithms were analyzed.

**Abstract:**
Reinforcement Learning (RL) has presented considerable potential as an advanced control technique in building controls 
to enable buildings operating more energy-efficient. As various types of RL algorithms have been studied on their 
performance of building controls, benchmarking these algorithms across the entire spectrum of features is essential 
to provide an overview and deepen the understanding of RL applications. Therefore, this study aims to compare and 
analyze the effectiveness of various RL algorithms, encompassing the entire RL categories featured by value-based, 
policy gradient, actor-critic and model-based RL considering model availability and policy representation. To provide
a comprehensive analysis, in addition to the control performance quantified by the cumulative rewards based on the
cost function of RL, data demand and robustness of hyperparameter tuning were investigated. The open-source Gym-Eplus 
framework was selected as the virtual environment to train and test different RL agents. The results showed that both
model-free and model-based RL agents outperformed the baseline rule-based control in terms of energy consumption and 
thermal comfort, and RL agents were capable of evaluating both short-term and long-term rewards to achieve adaptive
control optimization continuously along with the online control process. Model-based RL agent improved the data
sampling efficiency but presented a relatively sacrificed control performance during the tested summer days.