---
title: "MuFlex: A Scalable, Physics-based Platform for Multi-Building Flexibility Analysis and Coordination"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2026-02-26-muflex-energy-140565
date: 2026/02
venue: 'Energy'
paperurl: 'https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0360544226006687'
citation: '<strong>Wu, Z.</strong>, Korolija, I. & Tang, R. MuFlex: A Scalable, Physics-based Platform for Multi-Building Flexibility Analysis and Coordination. Energy 140565 (2026). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2026.140565.'
---

**Highlights**<br>
- A scalable, physics-based platform was developed for multi-building flexibilities.
- Benchmarking and analysing multi-scale building flexibility controls were enabled.
- A communication hub realized real-time links between models and control agents.
- MuFlex offered a modular, standardized design with the latest OpenAI Gym support.
- A well-tuned Soft Actor-Critic coordinated flexibility across four office buildings.

**Abstract:**
With the increasing penetration of renewable generation on the power grid, 
maintaining system balance requires coordinated demand flexibility from aggregations of buildings. 
Reinforcement learning (RL) has been widely explored for building controls because of its model-free nature. 
Open-source simulation testbeds are essential not only for training RL agents but also for fairly benchmarking control 
strategies. However, most building-sector testbeds target single buildings; multi-building platforms are relatively 
limited and typically rely on simplified models (e.g., Resistance-Capacitance) or data-driven approaches, which lack 
the ability to fully capture the physical intricacies and intermediate variables necessary for interpreting control 
performance. Moreover, these platforms often impose fixed inputs, outputs, and model formats, restricting their 
applicability as benchmarking tools across diverse control scenarios. To address these gaps, MuFlex, a scalable, 
open-source platform for multi-building flexibility coordination, was developed. MuFlex enables synchronous information 
exchange and co-simulation across multiple detailed building models programmed in EnergyPlus and Modelica, and adheres 
to the latest OpenAI Gym interface, providing a modular, standardized RL implementation. The platform's physics-based 
capabilities and workflow were demonstrated in a case study coordinating demand flexibility across four office buildings 
using the Soft Actor–Critic (SAC) algorithm. The results show that under four buildings' coordination, SAC effectively 
reduced the aggregated peak demand by nearly 12% with maintained indoor comfort to ensure the power demand below the 
threshold. Additionally, the platform's scalability was investigated through computational benchmarking on building 
clusters with varying sizes, model types, and simulation programs. The platform is released open-source on GitHub: 
https://github.com/BuildNexusX/MuFlex.