---
title: "Assessing the impacts of energy sharing on low voltage distribution networks: Insights into electrification and electricity pricing in Germany"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2025-01-15-energy-sharing-applied-energy-124743
date: 2025/01
venue: 'Applied Energy'
paperurl: 'https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0306261924021263'
citation: 'Lersch, J., Tang, R., Weibelzahl, M., Weissflog, J. & <strong>Wu, Z.</strong> Assessing the impacts of energy sharing on low voltage distribution networks: Insights into electrification and electricity pricing in Germany. Appl. Energy 378, 124743 (2025). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2024.124743.'
---

**Highlights**<br>
- Modeling of energy sharing in low-voltage distribution networks.
- Analysis of Energy systems’ configurations, pricing, and future projections.
- Assessment of Grid performance on loading, voltage, and reinforcement costs.
- Implementing real-world data from Munich, Germany, with upcoming regulations.
- Provision of insights into renewable energy communities for, e.g., regulators, utilities, and DSOs.

**Abstract:**
The shift towards renewable energy sources, which is especially significant in the residential sector, relies on 
distributed energy resources (DER) like PV systems, heat pumps, battery storage systems, and electric vehicles. 
Integrating DERs into low-voltage distribution networks presents challenges, including potential grid instabilities.
Energy sharing is a consumer-centric market approach, allowing consumers and prosumers to establish renewable energy 
communities (RECs) and share energy generated via DERs. Existing literature concerning energy sharing often prioritizes
highlighting the benefits it offers to participants, rather than examining its direct impacts on established system 
boundaries such as distribution grid infrastructure. To this end, we employ a sequential modeling approach to study 
the integration of energy sharing schemes facilitated by RECs and their impacts on grid performance metrics, such as 
component loading, voltage magnitudes, and grid reinforcement costs. We examine twelve scenarios reflecting different 
REC configurations, DER adoption levels, and pricing strategies for both current (2023) and future (2037) contexts in
Germany. Our findings indicate that implementing energy sharing not only results in considerable cost savings at the 
community level (with potential savings of up to 80% compared to scenarios without energy sharing) but also brings 
about significant reductions in grid asset loading (with decreases in transformer loading of up to 68% and line 
loading of up to 62%, compared to baseline scenarios). Conversely, we show that energy sharing can significantly 
influence voltage magnitudes at various nodes within the grid, potentially leading to substantial increases in grid 
reinforcement costs in future scenarios (i.e., 2037). Our research provides valuable insights for REC participants,
regulators, and DSOs to understand the impacts of energy sharing on European low-voltage distribution networks and
explore mitigation options, such as grid reinforcement measures.